README.md, before:

# Overview

An application built to foster collaboration between Maine researchers. 

Built by students, for the COS457 Database Systems course at the University of Southern Maine.

# How to Run

## Database

To utilize our database, download and setup MySQL.

Once finished, you should run the command...

`SOURCE ~/init/000_create_database.sql`

Note that you may have to use the absolute path to this file.

Once you've created the database, you should then run each script within the `migrations` directory, sequentially, in a similar manner. For example, start with:

`SOURCE ~/migrations/001_init_schema.sql`

## Scraping

To utilize our web-scraping tools, you must have downloaded and setup a local Python interpreter and environment.

Using your local environment, use the following command to install dependencies:

`pip install -r scraping/requirements.txt`

Once you have dependencies installed, you can run each web-scraping tool independently through the [`uma`, `umf`, `umo`, `usm`] subdirectories in the `scraping` directory.

Detailed documentation on the product of each of these scrapers, and how to run each scraper, may be found in their subdirectory's `README` file.

We soon plan to create one sole script to run each and every one of these scripts, and merge results into a unified, web-scraped file.


# Team Member Contributions & Task Distribution

## GitHub Username to Student Map

aidan073:      Aidan Bell

CDurepos:      Clayton Durepos

abbyPitcairn:  Abby Pitcairn

OwenLeitzell:  Owen Leitzell

## Task Distribution

### D1 - Recorded Video Demonstration
1. Clayton: Show the database running from scratch (creation, data loading, constraints in action). **deadline**: 11/15
2. Aidan, Owen: Discuss stored procedures, functions, queries, triggers, and indexing. **deadline**: 11/15 
3. Abby: Show at least one example of data scraping and cleaning results. **deadline**: 11/15

### D2 - MySQL Database Schema Scripts
Each member will create tables and indexes with comments for their designated tables:
1. Aidan:  Users[ `users`, `follows`, `recommendations` ]. **deadline**: 11/8
   
2. Abby:  Instutions & Equipment [`institutions`, `works_at`, `equipment`]. **deadline**: 11/8
   
3. Owen:  Publications & Keywords [`publications`, `publication_authors`, `keywords`, `publication_keywords`, `user_keywords`]. **deadline**: 11/8
   
4. Clayton:  Grants & Credentials [`grants`, `grant_providers`, `grant_recipients`, `credentials`]. **deadline**: 11/8

### D3 - Stored Procedures and Functions
Each member will document and implement the key system operations for their designated tables:
1. Aidan:  Users [ `users`, `follows`, `recommendations` ]. **deadline**: 11/12
   
2. Abby:  Instutions & Equipment [`institutions`, `works_at`, `equipment`]. **deadline**: 11/12
   
3. Owen:  Publications & Keywords [`publications`, `publication_authors`, `keywords`, `publication_keywords`, `user_keywords`]. **deadline**: 11/12
   
4. Clayton:  Grants & Credentials [`grants`, `grant_providers`, `grant_recipients`, `credentials`]. **deadline**: 11/12

The primary search procedure will be a joint effort. **deadline**: 11/12

### D4 - Data Scraping Scripts and Documentation
Each member will do the following for their designated Maine University: 
1. Provide scraping source code in python.
2. Document source websites, sample outputs, and cleaning steps.
3. Save scraping results in a .csv or .json file with MySQL import compatible formatting.

Designated Universities:
- Aidan:   UMO,  **deadline**: 11/5
- Owen:    UMA,  **deadline**: 11/5
- Abby:    USM,  **deadline**: 11/5
- Clayton: UMF,  **deadline**: 11/5

### D5 - Sample Data and Data Cleaning Documentation
Each member will provide scripts or CSV files showcasing a sample data insert into their designated tables with comments on how the data was validated and cleaned.
1. Aidan:  Users[ `users`, `follows`, `recommendations` ]. **deadline**: 11/6
   
2. Abby:  Instutions & Equipment [`institutions`, `works_at`, `equipment`]. **deadline**: 11/6
   
3. Owen: Publications & Keywords [`publications`, `publication_authors`, `keywords`, `publication_keywords`, `user_keywords`]. **deadline**: 11/6
   
4. Clayton:  Grants & Credentials [`grants`, `grant_providers`, `grant_recipients`, `credentials`]. **deadline**: 11/6

### D6 - Query Optimization Analysis
Clayton and Aidan undertook the query optimization portion of this phase.

### D7 - Comprehensive README file (.md)
For the **Individual Tasks**, each member will document how to run their individual scraping scripts, sample processing scripts, and SQL files. For the **Joint Tasks**, all members will document the full database recreation steps, and document any joint effort procedures such as the primary search procedure.

**Individual Tasks**:
1. Aidan - **deadline**: 11/15
2. Abby - **deadline**: 11/15
3. Owen - **deadline**: 11/15
4. Clayton - **deadline**: 11/15

**Joint Tasks**:
1. Database Recreation Steps - **deadline**: 11/15
2. Key Procedure Usage - **deadline**: 11/15

# COS457 Phase 2 Supplementary Material

## Query Optimization Analysis

### Query 1 — Generating Grant-Based Faculty Recommendations

A subtle feature we implemented is a script that generates recommendations between two faculty members who have both received funds from the same grant. The original procedure looked like this:

```sql
DROP PROCEDURE IF EXISTS recommend_faculty_grants;
DELIMITER $$

CREATE PROCEDURE recommend_faculty_grants()
BEGIN

    -- INSERT directional recommendations
    INSERT INTO faculty_recommended_to_faculty (
        source_faculty_id,
        target_faculty_id,
        match_score,
        created_at
    )
    SELECT
        fA.faculty_id      AS source_faculty_id,
        fB.faculty_id      AS target_faculty_id,
        NULL               AS match_score,
        CURDATE()          AS created_at
    FROM grants_granted_to_faculty AS gA
    JOIN grants_granted_to_faculty AS gB
         ON gA.grant_id = gB.grant_id
    JOIN faculty AS fA
         ON fA.faculty_id = gA.faculty_id
    JOIN faculty AS fB
         ON fB.faculty_id = gB.faculty_id
    WHERE fA.faculty_id <> fB.faculty_id
    GROUP BY
        fA.faculty_id,
        fB.faculty_id;

END$$
DELIMITER ;
```

While this worked, we quickly noticed redundancy:

- Joining the `faculty` table is unnecessary for this query, since we only need the `faculty_id` values, which are already present in `grants_granted_to_faculty`.
- The `GROUP BY` clause is also redundant. Its only purpose here was to avoid duplicate insertions, but our **PRIMARY KEY** and **ON DUPLICATE KEY** constraint already enforce uniqueness for `(source_faculty_id, target_faculty_id)`.

To optimize, we removed the extra joins and dropped the `GROUP BY`:

```sql
DROP PROCEDURE IF EXISTS recommend_faculty_grants;
DELIMITER $$

CREATE PROCEDURE recommend_faculty_grants()
BEGIN

    -- INSERT directional recommendations
    INSERT INTO faculty_recommended_to_faculty (
        source_faculty_id,
        target_faculty_id,
        match_score,
        created_at
    )
    SELECT
        g1.faculty_id      AS source_faculty_id,
        g2.faculty_id      AS target_faculty_id,
        NULL               AS match_score,
        CURDATE()          AS created_at
    FROM grants_granted_to_faculty AS g1
    JOIN grants_granted_to_faculty AS g2
         ON g1.grant_id = g2.grant_id
    WHERE g1.faculty_id <> g2.faculty_id;

END$$
DELIMITER ;
```

---

### Query 2 — Faculty Search Procedure

A core feature of **ScholarSphere** is the ability to search for faculty. For now, we implement this as a straightforward SQL stored procedure, with the idea of layering in embedding-based similarity scoring later on for certain attributes.

```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE search_faculty(
    IN p_first_name    VARCHAR(128),
    IN p_last_name     VARCHAR(128),
    IN p_department    VARCHAR(128),
    IN p_institution   VARCHAR(255)
)
BEGIN
    -- Use DISTINCT to handle cases where a faculty member
    -- has multiple departments or institutions
    SELECT DISTINCT
        f.faculty_id,
        f.first_name,
        f.last_name,
        d.department_name,
        i.name AS institution_name
    FROM faculty AS f
    -- LEFT JOIN ensures we get faculty even if they have no department
    LEFT JOIN faculty_department AS d
        ON f.faculty_id = d.faculty_id
    -- LEFT JOIN to get institution information through the works_at relationship
    LEFT JOIN faculty_works_at_institution AS w
        ON f.faculty_id = w.faculty_id
    LEFT JOIN institution AS i
        ON w.institution_id = i.institution_id
    WHERE
        -- If a parameter is NULL, we ignore that filter
        (p_first_name   IS NULL OR f.first_name        LIKE CONCAT(p_first_name, '%'))
        AND (p_last_name  IS NULL OR f.last_name       LIKE CONCAT(p_last_name, '%'))
        AND (p_department IS NULL OR d.department_name LIKE CONCAT(p_department, '%'))
        AND (p_institution IS NULL OR i.name           LIKE CONCAT(p_institution, '%'));
END $$
```

### Supporting Indexes

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_faculty_last_first_name
    ON faculty(last_name, first_name);

CREATE INDEX idx_faculty_department_dept_name
    ON faculty_department(department_name);
```

Since the procedure uses prefix LIKE searches (LIKE 'prefix%') on both last_name and first_name, the index allows MySQL to scan only the relevant portion of the faculty table rather than performing a full table scan. 

The index can be used when filtering by last_name alone or by both last_name and first_name, significantly improving query performance. Similarly, the index idx_faculty_department_dept_name on department_name allows the database to quickly locate matching department records without scanning the entire table. 

We anticipate that the department will be an important attribute for faculty to search on. These indexes ensure that both the join operations and the filtering conditions are efficient.

Commit message:

Revise README structure and update setup instructions
Reorganize sections for clarity, swapping Database and Scraping sections. Update commands and instructions for running the scraper and loading data into the database.

README.md, after:

# Overview

An application built to foster collaboration between Maine researchers. 

Built by students, for the COS457 Database Systems course at the University of Southern Maine.

# How to Run

## Scraping

To utilize our web-scraping tools, you must have downloaded and setup a local Python interpreter and environment.

Using your local environment, use the following command to install dependencies:

`pip install -r scraping/requirements.txt`

Once you have dependencies installed, you can run the unified scraper utilizing the command...

`python ~/scraper.py`

This may take some time. We suggest moving to Database setup while the scraper runs.

## Database

To utilize our database, download and setup MySQL.

Once finished, you should enter the `mysql` shell and run the command...

`SOURCE ~/init/000_create_database.sql`

Note that you may have to use the absolute path to this file.

Once you've created the database, you should then run each of the remaining scripts within the `init` directory. Following this, you should do the same for the scripts within the `migrations` directory. Each file in these directories begins with a prefix following the format `XXX_`, these indicate the order in which the scripts should be run.

## Data Loading

Once you've got the database setup & the scraper finishes gathering data, it's time to load the data into the freshly initialized database.

To do this, add your user-set database password to the `scraping/insert.py` file. Then, run:

`python ~/insert.py`

Once this operation finishes... Congrats! You've got the ScholarSphere Database set up.

# Team Member Contributions & Task Distribution

## GitHub Username to Student Map

aidan073:      Aidan Bell

CDurepos:      Clayton Durepos

abbyPitcairn:  Abby Pitcairn

OwenLeitzell:  Owen Leitzell

## Task Distribution

### D1 - Recorded Video Demonstration
1. Clayton: Show the database running from scratch (creation, data loading, constraints in action). **deadline**: 11/15
2. Aidan, Owen: Discuss stored procedures, functions, queries, triggers, and indexing. **deadline**: 11/15 
3. Abby: Show at least one example of data scraping and cleaning results. **deadline**: 11/15

### D2 - MySQL Database Schema Scripts
Each member will create tables and indexes with comments for their designated tables:
1. Aidan:  Users[ `users`, `follows`, `recommendations` ]. **deadline**: 11/8
   
2. Abby:  Instutions & Equipment [`institutions`, `works_at`, `equipment`]. **deadline**: 11/8
   
3. Owen:  Publications & Keywords [`publications`, `publication_authors`, `keywords`, `publication_keywords`, `user_keywords`]. **deadline**: 11/8
   
4. Clayton:  Grants & Credentials [`grants`, `grant_providers`, `grant_recipients`, `credentials`]. **deadline**: 11/8

### D3 - Stored Procedures and Functions
Each member will document and implement the key system operations for their designated tables:
1. Aidan:  Users [ `users`, `follows`, `recommendations` ]. **deadline**: 11/12
   
2. Abby:  Instutions & Equipment [`institutions`, `works_at`, `equipment`]. **deadline**: 11/12
   
3. Owen:  Publications & Keywords [`publications`, `publication_authors`, `keywords`, `publication_keywords`, `user_keywords`]. **deadline**: 11/12
   
4. Clayton:  Grants & Credentials [`grants`, `grant_providers`, `grant_recipients`, `credentials`]. **deadline**: 11/12

The primary search procedure will be a joint effort. **deadline**: 11/12

### D4 - Data Scraping Scripts and Documentation
Each member will do the following for their designated Maine University: 
1. Provide scraping source code in python.
2. Document source websites, sample outputs, and cleaning steps.
3. Save scraping results in a .csv or .json file with MySQL import compatible formatting.

Designated Universities:
- Aidan:   UMO,  **deadline**: 11/5
- Owen:    UMA,  **deadline**: 11/5
- Abby:    USM,  **deadline**: 11/5
- Clayton: UMF,  **deadline**: 11/5

### D5 - Sample Data and Data Cleaning Documentation
Each member will provide scripts or CSV files showcasing a sample data insert into their designated tables with comments on how the data was validated and cleaned.
1. Aidan:  Users[ `users`, `follows`, `recommendations` ]. **deadline**: 11/6
   
2. Abby:  Instutions & Equipment [`institutions`, `works_at`, `equipment`]. **deadline**: 11/6
   
3. Owen: Publications & Keywords [`publications`, `publication_authors`, `keywords`, `publication_keywords`, `user_keywords`]. **deadline**: 11/6
   
4. Clayton:  Grants & Credentials [`grants`, `grant_providers`, `grant_recipients`, `credentials`]. **deadline**: 11/6

### D6 - Query Optimization Analysis
Clayton and Aidan undertook the query optimization portion of this phase.

### D7 - Comprehensive README file (.md)
For the **Individual Tasks**, each member will document how to run their individual scraping scripts, sample processing scripts, and SQL files. For the **Joint Tasks**, all members will document the full database recreation steps, and document any joint effort procedures such as the primary search procedure.

**Individual Tasks**:
1. Aidan - **deadline**: 11/15
2. Abby - **deadline**: 11/15
3. Owen - **deadline**: 11/15
4. Clayton - **deadline**: 11/15

**Joint Tasks**:
1. Database Recreation Steps - **deadline**: 11/15
2. Key Procedure Usage - **deadline**: 11/15

# COS457 Phase 2 Supplementary Material

## Query Optimization Analysis

### Query 1 — Generating Grant-Based Faculty Recommendations

A subtle feature we implemented is a script that generates recommendations between two faculty members who have both received funds from the same grant. The original procedure looked like this:

```sql
DROP PROCEDURE IF EXISTS recommend_faculty_grants;
DELIMITER $$

CREATE PROCEDURE recommend_faculty_grants()
BEGIN

    -- INSERT directional recommendations
    INSERT INTO faculty_recommended_to_faculty (
        source_faculty_id,
        target_faculty_id,
        match_score,
        created_at
    )
    SELECT
        fA.faculty_id      AS source_faculty_id,
        fB.faculty_id      AS target_faculty_id,
        NULL               AS match_score,
        CURDATE()          AS created_at
    FROM grants_granted_to_faculty AS gA
    JOIN grants_granted_to_faculty AS gB
         ON gA.grant_id = gB.grant_id
    JOIN faculty AS fA
         ON fA.faculty_id = gA.faculty_id
    JOIN faculty AS fB
         ON fB.faculty_id = gB.faculty_id
    WHERE fA.faculty_id <> fB.faculty_id
    GROUP BY
        fA.faculty_id,
        fB.faculty_id;

END$$
DELIMITER ;
```

While this worked, we quickly noticed redundancy:

- Joining the `faculty` table is unnecessary for this query, since we only need the `faculty_id` values, which are already present in `grants_granted_to_faculty`.
- The `GROUP BY` clause is also redundant. Its only purpose here was to avoid duplicate insertions, but our **PRIMARY KEY** and **ON DUPLICATE KEY** constraint already enforce uniqueness for `(source_faculty_id, target_faculty_id)`.

To optimize, we removed the extra joins and dropped the `GROUP BY`:

```sql
DROP PROCEDURE IF EXISTS recommend_faculty_grants;
DELIMITER $$

CREATE PROCEDURE recommend_faculty_grants()
BEGIN

    -- INSERT directional recommendations
    INSERT INTO faculty_recommended_to_faculty (
        source_faculty_id,
        target_faculty_id,
        match_score,
        created_at
    )
    SELECT
        g1.faculty_id      AS source_faculty_id,
        g2.faculty_id      AS target_faculty_id,
        NULL               AS match_score,
        CURDATE()          AS created_at
    FROM grants_granted_to_faculty AS g1
    JOIN grants_granted_to_faculty AS g2
         ON g1.grant_id = g2.grant_id
    WHERE g1.faculty_id <> g2.faculty_id;

END$$
DELIMITER ;
```

---

### Query 2 — Faculty Search Procedure

A core feature of **ScholarSphere** is the ability to search for faculty. For now, we implement this as a straightforward SQL stored procedure, with the idea of layering in embedding-based similarity scoring later on for certain attributes.

```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE search_faculty(
    IN p_first_name    VARCHAR(128),
    IN p_last_name     VARCHAR(128),
    IN p_department    VARCHAR(128),
    IN p_institution   VARCHAR(255)
)
BEGIN
    -- Use DISTINCT to handle cases where a faculty member
    -- has multiple departments or institutions
    SELECT DISTINCT
        f.faculty_id,
        f.first_name,
        f.last_name,
        d.department_name,
        i.name AS institution_name
    FROM faculty AS f
    -- LEFT JOIN ensures we get faculty even if they have no department
    LEFT JOIN faculty_department AS d
        ON f.faculty_id = d.faculty_id
    -- LEFT JOIN to get institution information through the works_at relationship
    LEFT JOIN faculty_works_at_institution AS w
        ON f.faculty_id = w.faculty_id
    LEFT JOIN institution AS i
        ON w.institution_id = i.institution_id
    WHERE
        -- If a parameter is NULL, we ignore that filter
        (p_first_name   IS NULL OR f.first_name        LIKE CONCAT(p_first_name, '%'))
        AND (p_last_name  IS NULL OR f.last_name       LIKE CONCAT(p_last_name, '%'))
        AND (p_department IS NULL OR d.department_name LIKE CONCAT(p_department, '%'))
        AND (p_institution IS NULL OR i.name           LIKE CONCAT(p_institution, '%'));
END $$
```

### Supporting Indexes

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_faculty_last_first_name
    ON faculty(last_name, first_name);

CREATE INDEX idx_faculty_department_dept_name
    ON faculty_department(department_name);
```

Since the procedure uses prefix LIKE searches (LIKE 'prefix%') on both last_name and first_name, the index allows MySQL to scan only the relevant portion of the faculty table rather than performing a full table scan. 

The index can be used when filtering by last_name alone or by both last_name and first_name, significantly improving query performance. Similarly, the index idx_faculty_department_dept_name on department_name allows the database to quickly locate matching department records without scanning the entire table. 

We anticipate that the department will be an important attribute for faculty to search on. These indexes ensure that both the join operations and the filtering conditions are efficient.
